good evening all schools across Britain
will close by the end of the week until
further notice as the death toll from
coronavirus reached a hundred and four
Boris Johnson said schools will close
their doors by Friday from next week
most children will be at home until
further notice except for children of
key workers like NHS staff police and
delivery workers as well as the most
vulnerable a levels and GCSEs will not
go ahead in England and Wales a decision
has yet to be made in Scotland and
Northern Ireland the government said it
would make sure every child got the
proper recognition they deserve but
didn't say how the dramatic move came as
the number of confirmed cases of
coronavirus in the UK jumped by almost
seven hundred to two thousand six
hundred and twenty-six a hundred and
four people have now died the NHS said
those who died in England were aged
between 59 and 94 and had underlying
health conditions our political editor
Lawrenceburg is in Westminster Laura
Sophie this was a decision that the
government never wanted to have to take
a decision that they put off until they
felt it was the crucial moment to act
but as the number of people infected by
this disease continues to mount so to
the impact on all of our lives continues
to become more and more profound and
this time it has turned the lives of
millions of children and therefore
millions of families around the country
upside down with school gates closing
after lessons on Friday for a time being
and no one knows until when
home time not just til the morning but
maybe for many months the school bell on
Friday will signal the end of normal
life for millions of families for the
foreseeable future
I think it's good for the children but I
think it's going too hard for the PSO so
what I'm good at what that's why I see
scary it's killing the people I can't I
can I steal died so it's no such a
problem I wait it's not too bad it's
perhaps not the last resort for the
government but certainly closing school
gates was one of the measures ministers
were desperate to avoid after schools
shut their gates from Friday afternoon
they will remain closed for most pupils
for the vast majority of pupils until
further notice now I know that these
steps will not be easy for parents or
for teachers and for many parents this
will be frustrating and it will make it
harder for them to go out to work
families will wonder maybe more than
anything else tonight how long these
closures might last can you give us any
indication our judgement right now is
that this is the moment to provide
further downward pressure I wish I could
give you answer about how long it will
be Laura but we've got to do it right
now
for the children of key workers it could
mean school as usual but for teenagers
that means exams off for now we work so
hard and the past two years it's always
had that long and goal GCSEs and it's
just got to the point where that's in
sight and now it's not anymore say
school closures could make business even
trickier for firms struggling to stay
afloat she can get them for Mother's Day
that would be brilliant yeah Sally Field
a florist in Bristol has plenty of
orders from Mother's Day but despite the
government's promise to prop up the
economy with hundreds of billions of
pounds of loans
she is uncertain deeply uncertain about
what might come next if the staff were
to have to not come in look after their
children if we don't get the orders in
I would be able to pay the rent of the
shop it's a massive worry
does it rush for more support the
government promised tonight to help
renters with a plan to ban evictions
with well over two and a half thousand
cases of the disease ministers and
officials keep vowing to do whatever it
takes
Whitehall is scrambling to keep up with
the demands of this crisis for the
government to be able to explain quickly
and precisely exactly how they plan to
keep the many promises that have been
made there's a sense there could be more
interventions and more restrictions on
the way the national safety nets
expanding but there are still holes like
the gaps on the Commons green benches
today MPs deliberately keeping their
distance coronavirus may be a mild
illness for the majority so the effects
on the country could be grave BBC news
Westminster the closure of schools poses
a huge challenge to parents who are
trying to earn a living many of them now
working from home the government also
stressed that children shouldn't be left
with grandparents who are the most
vulnerable to the virus all exams have
been cancelled in England and Wales and
Scotland and Northern Ireland are due to
make a decision in the coming days our
education editor Bronwyn Jeffries
reports a last glimpse of normal school
life before education is largely set
aside schools instead a crisis service
had teachers now expected to lead well I
suppose there's been a sense of really
inevitability we've got to muck in this
is a national emergency and schools are
the bedrock communities and we will do
everything that we possibly can to help
they've worked for exams now cancelled
in England even before they knew for
certain they were worried about next
steps
your future which you have to be worried
about getting a qualifications how
that's going to affect your life in the
future so it's a really big issue at the
moment it's our year group for GCSEs but
for others it's their year group for any
levels for first year at university all
sorts of things and it's just so
disruptive
of everyone's lives everyone's been
saying how they think it will completely
impact the way that we all socially
interact like moving forward so
handshakes greetings etc and it just
yeah it's quite a I hope not
so that's it schools closed for the
foreseeable future they will still have
a stripped back role providing somewhere
safe for the children of key workers
such as those working in the NHS and
looking out for vulnerable children
but that's only children with social
workers or those with education health
care plans as classrooms empty no place
for those on free school meals only an
offer of food vouchers and for parents
challenges ahead
unfortunately I work from home and so
does my husband so it won't affect us
but I'm pretty sure it's gonna have a
significant impact and lots of other
parents especially knowing that's gonna
go around the school and come home to
every you know grandparents other person
in your life you know everyone could get
it so the sooner they shut it down the
better for children the anchor of
routine cut loose as schools prepared to
ride out this storm brahmand Jeffries
BBC News West Sussex let's talk to our
political editor north keansburg in
Westminster and Laura we seem to be
following in the footsteps of countries
like France and Spain school closures
this week a lot of people wondering if
there are going to be further
restrictions next the government's
position has always been quite clear
that they have taken decisions as and
when the data looked at and produced by
a government scientist has been changing
over time but they've also been quite
clear that there's been a range of
things on the table a kind of series of
steps or to use the jargon that's been
used in Whitehall it's like a ladder
with different rungs and as we go up the
stage of getting through this I outbreak
the government needs to take different
actions to try to clamp down and above
all else of course to save lives it was
notable today that the Prime Minister
didn't rule out increasing the level of
restrictions on our lives in fact he was
quite explicit in doing so but I think
that said we should also be clear that
the government has been trying very hard
and clear about the fact that they are
taking a step by step
proach they are trying to be guided
every day by the best information that
is put forward to them in what is
clearly a very rapidly changing
situation where all sorts of demands are
being put on everybody in government and
of course everybody around the country
and there's no question with that
schools announcement today that's been
something that's been coming for a while
the direction of travel has been quite
clear but we are already at a stage
where people's lives are being
profoundly changed by the way in which
this disease is unfolding not just in
this country but of course around the
world and there is a sense that
Whitehall is really trying to scramble
to keep up with the pace of how this
disease is spreading and for the
government of course that means there
are no straightforward decisions here
they're making very very big promises
but there is of course a lot of
political pressure over how in the days
weeks and months they'll be able really
to make them come true
Laura keansburg thank you well another
main focus today was on the legislation
being brought forward to protect tenants
who may soon be at risk of eviction and
3-month mortgage payment holidays
extended to landlords there have also
been concerns about a lack of support
for people who work for themselves our
political correspondent Alex Forsyth has
been speaking to people to find out how
small businesses and those who are
self-employed are coping simply staying
open is the priority for many small
businesses now Hetty spent years
building up her cake supplier but demand
has slumped determined to keep going
she's offering brownies by mail order to
stay afloat the feeling is definitely
like fear of losing everything but I'm
trying to stay positive as best as I can
she says new government measures grants
help with sick pay a hugely welcome but
reluctant to take out a loan her biggest
fear is how to keep paying her six
members of staff I don't want to lose
them
if I could put them on some kind of
subsidized paid redundancy or temporary
redundancy
that would be ideal and then they can
cover their costs and we can still
afford to keep running perhaps at a
lower caste in the meantime the
government has offered billions to stop
businesses closing but some want more
support for those who face losing their
jobs
all those self-employed or not in line
for sick pay John is a freelance
lighting designer his work has
completely dried up he's thinking of
selling his car to help with rent and
bills saying people in his position have
no safety net anything will be a good
start maybe some price credit card
interests I was just putting it's really
distressing not just for me but to see
you know all my friends and colleagues
in the same boat it's just happened all
in the same week the government's been
clear the measures announce for
businesses so far are just the start it
says there will be more support for
those struggling and today the Prime
Minister promised no one will be evicted
if they can't pay their rent because of
coronavirus this letting agent says
detail is key but welcomes news that
landlords will be given a mortgage break
to help tenants who can't pay it's
brilliant that we've got support for
tenants and that they know they're not
going to be evicted during this time we
just now need to make sure that the
tenants know where to go for the help
and they're also landlords know where
they can also go for the help if if the
pretendin can't pay with the next few
days and weeks so uncertain so many will
be relying on support to simply keep
going
Alex Forsyth BBC news Gloucester the
pound has plunged to its lowest level in
35 years trading at one dollar fifteen
as the threat of coronavirus spooked
investors it comes as financial markets
tumbled again after major stimulus plans
failed to quell fears about the economic
impact of the virus our economics editor
faisal islam reports
the city is emptier than it ever has
been on trading afternoon as bankers and
traders work from home but the
international financial markets are
still open and today they set their
sights on the UK forcing up government
borrowing rates and sending the pound
sterling plunging to near record lows
the pound fell up to 5% today against
the dollar meaning a 12% fall since
early last week down to its lowest level
since 1985 it also fell sharply against
the euro in New York's and sharp
stock market Falls suspended trading yet
again the Dow Jones ending up at a lower
level than inherited by President Trump
but the US dollar is strengthening as
investors seek out safe havens some have
suggested that these massive daily
market moves and not helping pandemic
fighting efforts and they should be
suspended this morning the governor of
the Bank of England told the BBC that
the markets should be kept open but he
warned speculators to think very
carefully about exploiting the crisis
you need to think very carefully you
know going out and frankly shorting in a
way that is just designed to sort of
deliberately exploit the situation just
stop and think about you know frankly
the broader ethics of what you're doing
it is an extraordinary sight this
symbolic heart of British capitalism
that has many people traffic tourists
workers and that's a good sign for
public health but it's a bad sign for
the economy shows something closer to
recession and this is job of this
institution the Bank of England and
Governor Andrew Bailey to use its
unlimited firepower to stop that getting
much worse than having permanent
economic scars of a depression
industries across the UK have been
closing down from car factories to
Airlines laying off workers at least
temporarily some without pay what is
your message to a boss right now facing
plunging customer revenue massive
uncertainty and one you know hovering
over a computer mouse deciding whether
or not to click in and fire people or
not pay people stop look at what's
available look at what the government's
doing look at what the Bank of England's
doing we're working in close
coordination look at what's available
come and talk to us talk to the
government talk to us before you take
that decision because supporting
companies and enabling companies to
support their workforces
is critical here but the economic
challenges are spreading reduce services
in the rail industry another sector to
bailouts for a government vowing to use
whatever it takes to prevent the whole
economy coming off the track faisal
islam BBC news the government says it
wants to increase the number of people
being tested for coronavirus from around
5,000 a day at the moment to up to
25,000 a day in a few weeks time
meanwhile some frontline staff say
they're worried and scared about the
lack of protective equipment available
when they're treating patients but the
prime minister told mps that there was a
massive effort ongoing to ensure that
staff had enough equipment to deal with
the outbreak here's our health editor
Hugh pin this is a message from the
government's chief medical officer about
coronavirus it's important we all
protect older people and those with
existing health conditions from
coronavirus starring in a new TV advert
the chief medical officer for England
getting his message straight into
people's homes symptoms and miles he
should all stay at home
Chris witty hardly known a few weeks ago
is now a household name at the forefront
of plans to tackle the coronavirus
threat one of the problems they're
facing up to is protection for NHS staff
some say they haven't got masks and
other personal protective equipment PPE
so they're at risk of infection at work
we don't feel that the government has
been transparent with how many masks
they have how many advanced masks they
have and how much protector protective
equipment is available for frontline
staff over the coming days weeks and
months we fear that it might be already
too late if I've already been exposed
then it's too late in the Commons the
Prime Minister wanted to reassure staff
it was a priority there is a massive
effort going on comparable to the effort
to build enough ventilators to ensure
that we have adequate supplies of PEEPi
equipment not just now but throughout
the outbreak a major ventilator company
though said the UK was very poorly
equipped ministers this week appealed to
British businesses to develop new
products the government says virus
testing will be more than doubled to
25,000 a day focusing first on hospitals
then on extra tests for staff and in the
community preparations for a surge in
very sick patients include a temporary
mortuary set up to increase capacity by
Westminster Council and the NHS is
clearing the decks at the Whittington
Hospital in North London they've
prepared this ward with piped oxygen for
kovat 19 patients the beds are normally
used for those who've had non urgent
operations they've now been stopped for
the next few months okay so this is my
tiny room it's our kind of spare room
two beds one small window to the garden
and that's about it really
and I've been here for it's Friday
dr. Maria Goddard told me what it's like
to be isolated and unwell with
coronavirus symptoms
exhaustion slightly short of breath so
how well-prepared does she think the NHS
is this unprecedented response and it's
really impressive I'm very very
impressed and I think the public will be
very well looked after
I just took that the resource is enough
and that's the big question will the NHS
preparations be enough nobody right now
can really answer that Hugh Pym BBC News
major supermarkets are taking new
measures to try and stop panic buyers
emptying the shelves leading grocery
brands are keen to stress that the food
supply chain is still functioning and
there is enough for everyone
as long as shoppers behave responsibly
Emma Simpson reports they're open but
just for elderly and vulnerable
customers at this Iceland branch in
Glasgow today a two-hour window to shop
before the masses and has gone down well
that's brilliant honest to god you know
what your men
don't know how long it'll last I've got
quite a few neighbors here quite elderly
and there they may need help as well so
that's why I got to get a load to take
to Sainsbury's is saving the first hour
at all it's 600 supermarkets tomorrow
for those most in need not easy when
demand still growing this was the scene
at 6:30 a.m. this morning in South West
London shoppers queuing for the doors of
this supermarket to open we're asking
everyone to do the right thing as they
show up tomorrow morning we are seeing
more food coming into our supermarkets
every day more than any other time of
the year and we are continuing to be
able to enable that supply if everybody
bought what they needed for themselves
and for their family there will be
enough food our supermarkets are now on
a crisis footing putting in place
unprecedented measures to keep the food
on the shelves
everyone to some extent is limiting the
amount of products customers can buy for
our biggest grocers it's now three items
on all products at Sainsbury's for the
most popular essentials it's down to two
supermarkets are also streamlining their
operations for instance Sainsbury's Asda
and Tesco are closing specialist
counters to free up staff akkad oh the
online grocer is shutting down its
entire website until Saturday for
changes to free up more delivery slots
right now it can no longer meet demand
at Morrison's they're getting ready to
produce basic food parcels which can be
ordered by phone they'll be dispatched
direct from their distribution centres
starting next week another example of
how our supermarkets are working to keep
everyone fed and the Simpson BBC news
older and disabled people who are cared
for at home are particularly vulnerable
and the care companies who look after
them say they're having problems getting
protective equipment the government says
it will be made available they're also
calling for virus testing for their
staff and financial help to meet the
pressures here's our social affairs
correspondent Allison Holt in the
control room of Trinity homecare in
Surrey care coordinators are busy
managing the increasing pressures on
their staff caused by the corona virus
and reassuring the older and disabled
people they look after we ain't gonna
let you completely run out of food we
will grab some bits it's quite high-risk
so I don't think
I'm a prescription usually there's a
date the fretless prescribes they are
training new care workers to try to meet
the growing need but in a sector which
has faced years of underfunding and
staff shortages many care companies say
they're already struggling frustrating
for senior care workers Shona who has a
lung condition so is now office-based to
keep her safe I will miss my clients
because they are so used to me calling
in and seeing them and I've had to
explain
not-not-not tell them what's wrong with
me but just err I will not be physically
physically visiting them but I'll make
sure that they're well looked after care
providers are also desperate for
protective equipment like gloves and
face masks needed to care for people
with kovat 19 and they want testing for
staff so those without the virus can
work company bosses say to cope firms
need councils to start paying for
services upfront today the role of the
care sector has been understated at all
times in recent years we've seen a
decimation of funding to this sector we
are the fourth emergency sector and we
need to be recognised as that the
government says companies will get more
financial support and personal
protection equipment is on its way
Allison Holt BBC news